okay good morning
everyone congratulations to those taking
the course for graduate credit you've
reached the end of the first 10
assignments hopefully you have an
experimental platform now on which you
can evolve neural controllers for
virtual robots inside of virtual
environments take a deep breath pat
yourself on the back and around we go
again so for The Graduate students uh
there is now waiting for you the first
of the five differentiable assignments
uh I've been working on these there are
not going to be 10 there will be five of
them in the first one you're going to be
tackling objects like you tackled links
in the first
assignment next week you're going to
tackle Springs so we're going to attach
objects together with springs this is a
little bit different from attaching
links together with rotational joints
we're going to connect together uh Mass
points so very very small bits of
material attach them together uh with
springs the week after that you're going
to be adding Motors to the Springs so I
want you to imagine two small bits of
material attached with a spring and
inside the spring is a piston that can
pull the spr the pairs of connected
objects towards one another or the
Piston can extend uh extensive force and
push those pairs of connector
objects
apart after that uh as usual after that
will be spring recess and then after
that the fourth assignment you will be
adding sensors to a whole bunch of
objects that are connected together with
motorized Springs that will make this uh
robot start to move and as always
towards the end you're going to be
connecting Those sensors to those
motorized Springs to get your robot to
move
what you should have at the end of this
fifth differentiable uh assignment is a
robot that's made up of a bunch of
objects connected together with
motorized Springs that are pulling and
pushing pairs of connected objects
together we have actually seen a robot
in this in this class that already looks
quite a bit like that where and when did
we see that robot anybody remember is
that the T SEC the 10 security robot so
NASA is actually prototyping this is a
potential way to develop uh Rovers for
the years to come that's what you're
going to be developing in these
differentiable assignments what do we
mean by differentiable assignments well
if we go back to our brenberg vehicles
for a moment where we've got a small
vehicle that's running around with
driving around with two wheels on the
back and two sensors on the front and we
have the two sensors connected to the
two Motors
this is as we've seen sort of the
simplest robot you can
imagine in this course what we're
looking at is ways to wrap this whole
thing in an evolutionary algorithm where
the evolutionary algorithm in this case
is trying to find two numbers for these
two synaptic weights that cause this
brenberg vehicle to do whatever it is
that we want this vehicle to do in an
evolutionary robotics experiment it's a
semisupervised learning problem
semi-supervised meaning that we take two
sets of synaptic weights drop them onto
our robot's neural controller watch how
the robot does it running around and we
get back a single number which is how
well the robot did how do we determine
how to change these two synaptic weights
to make this number bigger to make the
robot do more
phototaxis randomly the short answer is
we don't know so we make random changes
part of what's going on in the current
AI Revolution is figuring out how to
actually take this number and propagate
it backwards from the sensors into the
motors and
identify it was this one that was wrong
not this one we can actually in some
cases localize where the problem was or
where the issue was that was causing the
inefficiency and then we can also
identify not just where the problem is
but automatically identify how to
improve that number whatever this
synaptic weight is should we make it a
little bigger or a little smaller again
usually we don't know so we do it at
random when we design robots in a
differentiable manner we can actually
apply some of this machine learning uh
Machinery to actually identify where the
problem is and fix it automatically and
remove the randomness from the way in
which we automatically design autonomous
machines make sense okay all right so
for the grad students that's what you're
going to be doing in D1 through D5 for
the undergraduates if you're running
ahead and if you reach the end of
assignment 10 uh early before the end of
the course you're welcome to try and
tackle the differentiable assignments if
you want um this is New Territory for
this course so if you do tackle the
differentiable assignments and you get
stuck please come see me during my
office hours rather than the teaching
assistant and I will try and help you as
best I can any questions about any of
that okay all right undergraduates uh I
lost where we were here here we are uh
you are going to be tackling uh
assignment six this week uh in
assignment six you're kind of pausing
for a moment and you're going to be
doing a bunch of refactoring uh your
code base through assignments one
through five is getting larger and
larger and larger and I don't know about
you you but at this point you've
probably forgotten where variable XYZ is
and where function ABC is so you're
going to refactor the code modularize it
clean it up a little bit so as you
continue on through assignments 7 8 n
and 10 you'll have a more modular code
base and it'll be easier for you to
remember where everything is make
improvements rapidly debug anything when
it goes wrong and so
on okay all good okay all right back to
our lecture material so last time we
just finished uh lecture eight where we
looked at a particular kind of neural
network controller the cnns CNN stands
for thank you continuous time so we're
dealing with neurons that are changing
their their values continuously over
time cnns have much more biological
detail built into them than the standard
neural networks we've been looking at so
far they're more complicated but that
complication buys us some things it
allows us it allows us or it allows uh
The evolutionary algorithm makes it
easier for The evolutionary algorithm to
evolve behaviors for robots that are
being controlled by a CNN we ended last
lecture by looking at this small
humanoid robot that was shaking blocks
up and down and then left and right and
then forward and backwards that robot
evolved the ability to exhibit a
particular building block of
intelligence which is the ability to
stack hierarchically together motor
Primitives yeah it was able to do that
by having a cinn brain in which some of
the neurons are quick and orchestrate
sensor motor
coordination and then other neurons are
slow and act like the conductor of a
symphony and slow changes in those slow
neurons
push the activity of the fast neurons
into different motor Primitives fast
push the fast neurons into different
motor Primitives like this like this and
like this so some of that biological
detail made it easier for The
evolutionary algorithm to evolve
hierarchical arrangement of motor
Primitives okay so today we're going to
push on to lecture N9 where we're going
to look at the original minimal
cognition experiments as you'll see in a
moment the robots in these minimal
cognition experiments they look very
much like brenberg Vehicles they're very
very simple they're being all all of
them are going to be controlled by CTI
andn so they don't necessarily have
minimal
brains the goal in the minimal cognition
experiments is to try and evolve more
and more and more and more of these
building blocks of intelligence if we
can't Define what intelligence is why
don't we sort of agree on the things
that are necessary for intelligent
Behavior here in the real world and see
how many of them we can evolve into
machines which ones are more difficult
than others how do we combine them
together in a machine that is able to
exhibit more and more and more of these
building blocks and maybe that's a more
systematic way to approach the creation
of increasingly intelligent increasingly
complex increasingly useful and
increasingly safe
machines very different from the
dominant Paradigm at the moment which is
make Chachi PT release it to the world
and hope everybody finds a good use for
it and that nothing bad goes wrong you
obviously know where my uh sympathies
lie I'll leave it up to you to form your
own opinions okay minimal cognition here
we go uh I hope you enjoy today's
lecture it's you can think of it as like
the robot Olympics we're going to look
at a whole bunch of different events
where the robots are going to be tasked
with exhibiting uh some of the uh we're
going to look at four different building
blocks today four different competent
icies of intelligent behavior let's
start with the first of the four which
is perceiving
affordances we've seen another uh a
number of Concepts from psychology make
their way into robotics so far
affordances is another big one anybody
come across this concept in a site class
before sort of giving you the punchline
here already when we look about in the
world around us and I was to ask you for
example to describe what a chair is
you'd probably give me a geometric
description of a chair it's got these
vertical things underneath that are made
of sufficiently strong material to hold
up this flat piece and there's usually a
flatb and you go and try and describe it
back in the 1970s when people were
starting in on uh trying to get AI to
recognize objects and what they're for
that's what they did uh PR programmers
spent decades trying to describe to a
computer what a chair is by giving it a
geometric description a geometric
understanding of chairs it doesn't take
long to realize that a geometric
approach to understanding objects runs a
muuk because this particular thing here
not strictly not strictly a chair but it
clearly belongs to this other
group breaks a lot of those geometric
assumptions of what a chair is I
deliberately picked these five images
because they clear hopefully to you they
all immediately have something in common
but I challenge you to find a geometric
commonality among these five
objects it feels as if we understand
objects in the world based on their
geometric properties but thinking about
thinking is
misleading a concept that came out of uh
psychology in the 1970s and the 1980s
was an idea that when humans look at
objects we might think we're classifying
our understanding objects based on their
geometric properties but we're actually
understanding objects based on the
affordances they project to us we can
imagine objects out in the world
shouting at us about the ways in which
we can interact with those objects so an
affordance that's shared by all of these
objects for adult human beings is that
they are cable you could rest your
weight on them in a relatively
comfortable manner that description is
about you or about you and the
interaction with the object and what
kind of interactions that object affords
to you that's the idea of
affordances what do these objects have
in
common what about these objects
objects what do they have in common
we're playing the affordance game
now all contain
energy they all contain energy that's
exploitable by by us it's always an it's
it's about us the Observer is a part of
understanding the world around it what
we are doing as active entities in the
world that want to survive and thrive in
the world we're selfish we're looking at
everything thinking about how we can use
it how we can inter how we can interact
with it how we can consume it how it can
make our lives a little bit easier and
so on that's the idea of affordances so
maybe when we're making computer we're
trying to make smart computers and smart
robots and smart machines we should be
trying to teach these machines to look
at the world around them and not run
computer Graphics or try and recognize
particular geometries like does this
thing have three or four vertical struts
and a horizontal platform on top they
should be looking for affordances trying
to learn or evolve the ability to
recognize how they can interact with
objects out there in the world make
sense okay optional homework as you
continue on with your day today and you
look at the Myriad objects that you look
at watch yourself watch those objects
and you'll notice that on the surface it
feels like you're recognizing Things
based on geometric properties but you're
really thinking about
affordances writable listenable erasable
and so on okay all right so now let's
have a look at trying to get a minimal
machine to perceive affordances here's
the first of the four minimal cognition
experiments as promised we have a very
very minimal robot here we've got a
square so this is a minimal physical
simulator as well this our little robot
here exists in a two-dimensional World
these two little horizontal axes here
represent two Rockets So in our brenberg
vehicle we had two spinning wheels I
want you to now imagine a square with
two opposing rockets and those Rockets
can exert more or less thrust if both
Rockets exert exactly the same thrust
the robot goes nowhere if neither of the
Rockets uh emit thrust the robot also
doesn't go anywhere if one emits more
thrust than the other it moves to the
left and vice versa it moves to the
right so we've got a little Space
Invaders type robot moving along the
bottom of the screen left and right at
different velocities and accelerations
and decelerations and from above we're
going to drop a pair of
objects everybody still know what Space
Invaders are okay all right all right
here we go we're going to evaluate every
ctrnn we're going to drop ctrnn into
this minimal robot one after the other
we're going to evaluate each individual
cerin n's ability to produce behavior on
average for the robot so the first
little bit of math here in the upper
right we're going to compute P or the
performance of the robot this is
synonymous with Fitness the authors of
this paper just use P instead of f for
our purposes it doesn't matter and
they're going to sum a whole bunch of P
subis which is the performance of a
given CNN on the robot the eyth time
we're going to take the average of how
well that CN causes the robot to do it
whatever want it to do a numb trials
time so far so good okay in each of
these numb trials trials we're going to
drop a pair of objects from above that
pair of objects are going to fall at a
constant rate and the robot can sense
these uh this object pair so the gray
emanating lines here uh represent 1 2 3
4 five six seven proximity sensors on
the front of the robot so this should
look pretty familiar this robot has
seven proximity sensors two motorized
rocket thrusters and a CNN inside you'll
notice that at this instant in time this
pair of falling objects is triggering
the second uh fourth and fifth proximity
sensor Those sensors are firing a little
bit more strongly and the first third
sixth and seventh proximity sensor are
returning a value of zero make
sense okay what is the robot supposed to
do
um as this pair of objects is falling
the robot has to figure out whether the
pair of objects is
passable the robot is trying to
recognize a particular affordance
projected by this object pair which is
whether the robot if it gets between the
pair of falling objects the pair of
objects will fall on either side of the
robot and not hit the robot is the
object pair passable or not is this Gap
wide enough for the robot to pass
through or not that's the affordance
we're going to try and evolve this robot
to
recognize okay so how do we compute P
subi how well the robot does given a
particular ctrnn on the ith trial we're
going to consider two different cases
we're going to consider the case where
the opening between the object pair is
too narrow for the object to pass
through so let's imagine actually you
can see it in this cartoon here this Gap
is narrower than the width of the robot
so in this case we're going to set P
subi to a maximum value of 100 if the
robot does not hit this object pair this
object pair is going to fall towards the
ground and the robot should be nowhere
near this object pair when it gets to
the ground if it does that during the
ifth trial 100 points otherwise if it
hits uh either of the pair of objects
we're going to assign p subi t 2 * d sub
i d
subi uh diabi is the final horizontal
separation between the horizontal
position of the robot and the horizontal
position of the object pair when it gets
to the
ground horizontal distance between the
robot and the object pair when it hits
there's a typo in the paper they take
the absolute value of the distance
distance is always a positive number
little typo there okay so what is this
particular term
doing for the
robot what's the worst possible thing
the robot can do in this
case the object pair is falling the uh
the Gap is too narrow for the robot to
get between the object pair what's the
worst possible thing the robot can do
try tole get right underneath the object
pair whack the pair of objects hits the
agent and we take we compute du subi
which is the horizontal distance between
the robot and the center of the object
pair in this hypothetical case DBI is
zero Pabi is set to zero maximum penalty
the robot did the worst possible thing
so what is this particular term in the
fitness function doing it's rewarding
for
Runway if the Gap is too narrow
everybody get the game so far okay you
can probably guess even without parsing
the math here what this term is going to
do in the other case in one of the ith
trials if the aperture the gap between
the object pair is wide enough for the
object for the agent to pass through it
should get 100 points the maximum score
if the robot is standing directly
underneath the object pair and the
object pair passes right past the agent
and it's inside the Gap maximum possible
points if the robot runs away when the
Gap is wide enough for it to pass
through minimum points no
points if the robot collides with one or
both of the objects as that object pair
reaches the ground we're going to set
pabai to this thing what is this thing
rewarding or penalizing
for well the absolute worst thing is if
it runs Beyond block so then it's
rewarding forting
closer the successfully going yes so the
worst thing you can do is be beyond the
blocks that's zero if you're pretty far
away from the center of the object pair
and you get hit that's bad and you're
gonna have a pretty big a pretty big D
subi so we've got a pretty big term on
the minus uh the minus side here so
we're trying to uh minimize du subi if
the robot's not quite sure what to do
and it's jittering back and forth
underneath this object pair and it hits
one or both of the objects we're going
to set T sub I to 80 minus this distance
we're trying to make this distance less
and less and less so we're trying to
make everything on the right hand side
of this minim of this minus sign less
and less and less if the robot's hitting
the block until eventually a robot
evolves in which du subi is small enough
that boom it's not hitting any it's not
hitting either of the objects in the
pair it's staying right underneath and
letting both objects pass on on either
side so in this second case when the
aperture is
passable what is this conditional doing
what is it selecting
for when the aperture is too narrow this
selects for Runway when the aperture is
wide enough this term is selecting for
going through going through stay in the
center right be right in the
center imagine we take one CNN we drop
it into the robot numb trials times and
sometimes the object pair has a passable
Gap sometimes the object pair has a has
a non-p passible gap we're applying
these two different Fitness terms we see
how well it does at running away when
the Gap is impassible and we see how
well it's doing at get right underneath
when the object with passible sum all
those up and take the average of all of
those terms and P should be high when
the robot runs away when it should run
away and P should be high when it gets
right underneath the pair when the Gap
is passable make sense
okay let's see how it
does I apologize in the back of the room
I'll try and talk you through this axis
what we're looking at in this bottom
left panel is
the most fit CNN after the evolutionary
algorithm has run so the investigators
have evolved a population of cnns in the
first generation with random cnns p is
probably pretty close to zero the robot
doesn't know what to do and over
evolutionary time in this population of
evolving ctrnn some of the cnns start to
achieve higher and higher average
performance until at the end end of
several hundred Generations they have
one ctrnn that gets a P value very close
to 100 they take that one evolve ctrnn
go back to the robot and drop it into
that robot thousands of times under lots
of different conditions and they want to
see how robust is that evolved ctrnn how
well really does it allow the robot to
do at what we want it to do in this case
on the horizontal axis here this is
showing us that the investigators
dropped that curnin back into the robot
thousands of times with varying
aperture good to know my software is up
to date thank
you okay dropping that uh curn in back
into the robot thousands of times with
aperture widths that are wider and wider
and wider than the robots width and
apertures that are narrower narrower and
narrower and
narrower and in all of those different
cases they measured the robot's final
horizontal separation where was the
robot horizontally relative to the
object
pair when the object pair hit the ground
how does this ctrnn this single evolve
CN how well does it do in
general
well well yes it's doing well is it
doing
perfectly not quite right evolution is a
satisficer not an Optimizer how is it
deviating from optimal
behavior
um I'm guessing from looking at this
that the robot is around like 40 units
wide uh
it it doesn't actually show us that so
the 40 up here this says that the robot
was 40 horizontal units away from the
object pair when the object pair hit the
ground again this is a unitless
simulation so it's not really that
doesn't really tell us much you just
have to trust me that 40 just means it's
really far away from the object pair
well um we can we can tell on the plot
that it's not perfect because like it
doesn't immediately drop down to zero
when it begins like going in between
both of the pairs assuming that's like
what it means when the final horizontal
separation is around like one or like
1.5 uh actually zero here relative
aperture width of zero this represents a
case where the width of the aperture
between the pair of objects is exactly
the same width as the
robot okay make sense go ahead so like
when when it Dr down it doesn't drop
down to like immediately zero it is just
never able to reach like the point where
it's perfectly between the blocks
absolutely so there's something
interesting going on here right in the
case where the width is just about pass
yeah I can't like quite tell if it can
fit or not so it's
like I should just go away because it it
might not be able to fit good good point
right do the same kind of thing too it's
like yes yes if it's like life or death
like that you might you might be like a
it's better to run away it's better to
run away right we're using very brenberg
es language here which is fine
right right when the aperture is a
little bit wider than the robot in
theory the robot can pass between the
object pair these big black vertical
bars these represent uh error bars or
confidence intervals what this means is
that this evolves C andn saw lots of
different falling object pairs in which
the aperture was wide enough and some of
the time it ran away and some of the
times it took a deep breath and actually
went for it and tried to get between the
object pair but it's being kind of
conservative right optimal behavior is
this black dot should be right down here
if the aperture is passible the robot is
supposed to go for it but it's not it's
being a little bit careful and as you
said we tend to do that as well so on
average maybe the best thing is to air
on the side of caution if you're not
quite sure run away kind of interesting
right it's a nonoptimal behavior humans
and every other species on the planet we
are also not optimal but the bias that
we typically have kind of makes sense
the ways in which we're non optimal
sometimes are kind of a good thing right
kind of interesting to see that
reflected here in an intelligent machine
as well
Emily absolutely great point right so we
could go back if we saw this and said
yeah we want this robot to be a little
bit braver we might be able to go back
and alter the fitness function to ex
exert a greater reward for going for it
regardless of how passable the aperture
is or maybe we would punish with greater
force cowardice right running away when
you shouldn't be running away
interesting another piece of optional
homework for you see if you can sit down
and try and rewrite these Fitness
functions that at least in theory would
would sort of clean up this conservatism
here
everybody see that question yeah how can
we be sure that the behavior we're
seeing around zero is due to you know
sort of this potential
cowardliness instead of just like
inaccuracies in the sensors causing it
to sometimes accurately you know yes
will say that it can fit whereas
sometimes it thinks it can fit and it
can't just because of the data it's
given that's a great that's a great
point and you're right so what we're
looking at is we're looking at a lot of
data in this plot but but all that data
is coming from one evolved ctrnn and
that one evolved ctrnn might have
idiosyn idiosyncrasies in it we could
take this evolutionary run and instead
of taking the ctrn with the best fitness
we take the CN that had the second best
fitness maybe it's the brother or sister
of this CNN or a cousin or a second
cousin it's not quite the same does it
if we did the same thing to that CN
would we get the same picture
maybe we'd get a different picture maybe
that one would be a little more Brave
and maybe it would be fool hearty maybe
it would try and run the Gap when the
Gap is too narrow maybe there's an issue
with the sensors maybe when that Gap is
just right at the edge of being passible
the robot can't
tell my understanding of this simulation
is the robot actually can tell the the
the sensors itself it's only ever
getting seven numbers at any one time
but remember that this robot is moving
back and forth horizontally at the
bottom of the screen it's like cat
whiskers it's able to sweep its seven
proximity sensors across the unders
sides of the objects it can this thing
can actually sense very well and pick up
very subtle details and we'll see
another example of that in a moment so
it's a good observation but I doubt it's
because of some limitation in the sensor
motor Behavior good good point other
questions or comments before we push on
yes it's funny to me that like as that
WID gets larger it starts to like seems
like maybe
ites it's it's showing off right the Gap
is really wide it gets underneath and it
kind of want to move or something yeah
exactly exactly and again I apologize it
would have been great to see some of the
videos of these not quite clear exactly
how this robot is is moving we're
inferring Its Behavior by looking at
this data
okay okay let's actually dive in again
we don't have an actual video of this
Behavior but let's actually investigate
a little bit more about how uh about how
these curn ends are evolving I love this
particular paper and I love this
particular lecture because of these sort
of different building blocks they look
at but these investigators really did
their due diligence as you as we're
going to see they really analyzed in
great depth how good or how poorly these
cinns evolved how well do they do in
general this was 23 years ago this was
in my opinion good work this is
something that we as a society are now
struggling with we have intelligent
machines and we're kind of deploying
them out into the real world and
sometimes they generalize well and
sometimes they don't how do we really
know when we've got something that does
well on paper and also will generalize
well to many many many different
situations in the real world including
edge cases cases where it's going to be
difficult for the machine to know
whether to Zig or zag in this experiment
literally okay here we go again we're
going to look at one we're going to look
at uh one good evolved ctrnn up here
let's have a look at this uh let's have
a look at this uh upper left panel for a
moment what they're going to do in this
case is they're going to take an object
pair in which the uh an object pair in
which the Gap is not passable the robot
can't get between the Gap and they're
going to drop that uh they're going to
drop that object pair above and to the
left of the robot then they're going to
drop that same object pair above and a
little again above and to the left of
the robot but a little bit towards its
Center they're going to drop that object
pair from here then here then here then
here here then here then here then here
then here so each one of each one of
these black trajectories represents one
trial everybody see that so far
okay the horizont sorry the vertical
axis here is representing the vertical
position of the object pair so as we
descend this panel from the top to the
left and watch one of these trajectories
we can see that pair of objects
falling
the horizontal axis is representing the
horizontal position of the
robot sorry the horizontal position of
the robot relative to the object pair so
let's start with this trajectory in the
upper left so at this point the object
pair was
dropped 40 units to the robots left what
did the robot do in that
case follow this
leftmost black trajectory from the upper
upper left part of this panel how did
the robot
move if we follow this trajectory it's
more or less vertical kind of vertical
for a while what is that telling us
about the robot it's like just waiting
it's waiting the relative the horizontal
distance between the robot and the
object pair is remaining at minus 40 the
robots moving a little bit but not too
much and then it starts to move
horizontal position starts to decrease
towards zero what is the robot doing to
the center it's going towards the center
at least the robot is moving to the left
the object pair Contin always falls
perfectly vertically I'm sorry I forgot
to mention that detail before object
pair always falls perfectly vertically
the robot is starting to move to its
left and what
happens after that
point it keeps going the robot keeps
going it's a little hard to see in this
plot this trajectory continues down here
and this trajectory ends down here in
the bottom right what does that tell us
about the state of the robot and the
object pair when the object pair gets to
the ground it's not it's not under it
it's where on the other side it's on the
other side the object pair started upper
left the robot started to move
underneath it and just kept going and
the object pair fell 40 units to the
robots
right okay that's for one trial now tell
me about all of these trials what is the
CN causing the robot to do in all of
these trials in which the Gap is not non
passible
impassible it's causing it to move 40t
away from like that Central position 40
feet away 40 meters away whatever it is
sometimes to the object pairs left and
sometimes to the object pairs right it's
always doing the right thing right
always running away everybody see
that okay same evolved CNN we're going
to expose it to a whole bunch of other
situations here we're going to drop the
object pair from different horizontal
positions at the top of the screen but
in this case the Gap is just passable
just wide enough for the robot to thread
its way between what does the robot do
in this
case goes through the Gap goes through
the Gap in every
case it's interesting that it's like
going back and forth through the middle
ones you'll notice that if we drop the
object pair towards the more or less
above the robot it kind of goes a little
bit to the left and then a little bit to
the right and then back and then stops
and shows off right for the last third
of the simulation it just stands there
and waits for either object to fall on
either side of it does that mean like
the of it is helping it to judge the
Gap so this is what the robot did can we
work backwards from its behavior in both
situations to what it's
thinking is it sweeping back and forth
so again it's using its proximity
sensors like cat Whisper whiskers to uh
to brush against the undersides of the
objects to better understand whether the
Gap is pass or
not I guess that at least for the closer
ones momentum just might have a play
might just try to move too fast and it's
trying to recorrect itself it could I
don't remember whether the physics
engine contains momentum it might that
that might be part of the reason it
might just not be able
to who knows maybe this sweeping back
and forth under the object pair is
useful maybe
not what else are you wondering about
about what's going going on inside the
CN given these
behaviors
sure
yep yes it's it's not clear from this
caption is it a huge passible gap or a
hugely impassible Gap it's not clear
from this picture or from the
caption
it's interesting that it doesn't just
like
immediately go somewhere like it does
take some time and it like does this
oscillating or whatever and then it like
decides maybe you would expect it to
like just sense and judge and go where
it needs to go but it doesn't do
absolutely right again there are lots
there's evidence here of
nonoptimality it seems to be taking its
time again that's due to the fitness
function the fitness function uh
contains du subi remember which is the
horizontal distance between the robot
and the object pair when the object pair
hits the ground there is nothing in the
fitness function that says figure it out
quickly just do the right thing when you
need to that's it so not surprisingly
the robot seems to be taking its time
you could have some term or something in
there that like punished it for using
more energy or something like that
absolutely you could
yep what else else can you infer about
the behavior of this robot it's minimal
it's very simple but even in the simple
case there's a lot of Rich dynamics that
are going on here lots of aspects of its
evolved behavior that suggests things
that might be going on inside the ctrnn
which is interesting that it seems to
behave the same exact way it's to the
left or right ah yes so I'm wondering
yeah like I feel like I remember you
saying usually the waves like AR sycal
when we evolve
but great observation if you look at
both panels each panel is bilaterally
symmetric the left side of the panel
looks like the right side of the panel
which means that the robot seems to be
exhibiting exactly the same way of
moving and ultimately what it
does in whether the objects are top left
or top right which suggests the synapses
inside the CN have evolved to be
bilaterally symmetric and I can tell you
that the researchers did not put that in
in this case so this is probably the
evolution of bilaterally symmetric
Behavior good observation um for the one
you can see there are like certain
trajectories that get further away
faster which is interesting it looks
like it's maybe like the ones that are
closer to the middle versus like all the
other ones thether out ones take a
little bit longer absolutely that is IND
something about how it's like sensing
the Gap could be but it's interesting
that there's like pretty much all the
ones in the middle seems to like hit
this one trajectory and the one on
theide absolutely so it looks like in
some cases it's taking the robot longer
to decide what to do when does the robot
know when does it decide the Gap is too
narrow I'm going to run away or when
does the robot decide the Gap is wide
enough I'm going to go for it
when it looks like it right if we look
at both panels above UH 60 those two
pair of trajectories look almost
identical right so the robot seems to be
doing exactly the same thing when the
block when the pair object pair is above
that height regardless of whether the
Gap is passible or impassible looks like
the robot doesn't know until 60 and then
it looks like at a height of 60 the
robot decides and either runs away or
gets right underneath the object it's
obvious the robot is making the decision
at a height of
60 I see some of you smiling you should
know by now in this course whenever I
say it's obvious that it's not the robot
is acting as if it decided at that
point never know right you remember the
liit experiments human subjects said I
know I decided at this particular to
time point to Twitch my finger they
thought that they were wrong right hard
to know actually when this robot decides
or how it decides but it does decide
there's something that's triggering run
away or stay where you are or at least
get under the pair all good okay let's
keep going these these uh investigators
really were uh interested in detail
let's talk about the lower left panel
now you'll notice that it's a whole
bunch of differently colored pixels
white gray and black pixels each
individual pixel in this panel
represents a single drop of an object
pair pixels that are uh pixels in the
upper half of this panel represent
object uh pair drops in which the Gap
was
passable pixels in the lower half of
this panel represent drops of the object
pair in which the Gap was not
passable uh pixels to the left of this
panel represent object pairs that were
dropped up and to the left of the robot
and pixels to the right hand side in
this panel represent pair drops uh drops
that were pairs that were dropped up and
to the right of the robot so far so good
okay for each of those conditions the
investigators colored that pixel white
if the robot did the right thing black
if the robot did the wrong thing and
gray if it kind of did okay maybe it was
jittering around maybe it bumped one or
both of the objects
tell me about again this single evolved
ctrnn what is it causing the robot to do
in thousands of different situations now
it has trouble like on the sides
horizontal position are
to okay you're talking about these big
gray blobs up here you're right so these
are far to the left and far to the right
which represent cases where the objects
were dropped far to the left or far to
the right of the robot and all these
gray blobs are in the upper half which
means go the that the aperture was
passable it could go through but it was
bumping the blocks in this case it
wasn't quite sure what to
do if you drop the object pair
directly above the robot it does really
poorly when it does really poorly when
the aperture is passable it runs away
away down here when the Gap is narrow it
also runs away which in that case is the
right thing to
do why do you think it does so terribly
right when the object pairs Dro directly
overhead seems kind of
odd if you look at the graphs above it
needs some sort of motion to
protect or like to make
decision it needs to go maybe so it
looks like the robot needs to move back
and forth to determine whether the Gap
is passable or not but the object pairs
dropped from directly ahead it's still
free to move back and forth and figure
it out it doesn't seem to be able to
figure it out in a lot of these cases
what
gives um when an object's like directly
above you like it's the hardest to
perceive like distance between both the
objects maybe in that case the robot
should just move left and right figure
it out right don't don't have the object
pair be directly above you the robot's
free to move back and
forth the network developed complely
symetrically
could could be could be may maybe
there's something about the Symmetry
that that helps it in general but there
are specific cases in which it kind of
you know it's fighting with itself
possibly another hint is if you look at
this picture you'll notice that they
never actually dropped the object pair
from directly overhead now this was an
experim experiment they performed after
Evolution but my guess is and they don't
explicitly say it in the paper is that
during Evolution they also never dropped
an object pair directly above the robot
it just never saw that
situation again it's not clear might be
a little bit of all of these
explanations this is a Hallmark
unfortunately of every intelligent
machine on the planet at the moment
right robot chat GPT stable diffusion in
general they work pretty well most of
the pixels in this plot are white great
unfortunately there are regions or there
are situations in which not only does
the machine kind of misbehave it does
absolutely the wrong thing and in this
minimal experiment we can actually sweep
over all possible conditions or almost
all possible conditions and see where
those blind spots are in the machine
unfortunately here in the real world
harder to do no one has an answer about
how to deal with this problem or make it
better plenty of people in the community
will tell you that they
do no one's figured it out yet hopefully
some of you will help with this very
needed uh solution okay should we push
on okay that's uh competency number one
perceiving affordances we just saw an
evolved robot that's able to tell you or
show you that it knows whether a gap is
passable or not let's look at the second
of of the second of four building blocks
of intelligence that we're going to look
at in the minimal cognition experiments
this one is discriminating between self
and non-self we've actually already seen
a robot in this course that learned to
do this what was that robot anybody
remember you forget his name her name
what what did baby bot right the two
cameras all it could see was whether
things move or not when it sends
commands to its
Motors very important thing for machines
and Tiny humans to figure out as well
figure out where you end and everything
else begins okay so characteristically
the
investigators uh investigated the
ability to evolve self- non-self
discrimination in a minimal robot this
robot is welded at the bottom center of
the screen it has no Rockets it can't
move left and right but it has an
arm pointing up in front of it and it
can send commands to rotate this arm
backwards and forwards above its head
and it's got a little tiny hand which
self Eudes its Vision so again this
robot has seven uh outgoing
it's got seven outgoing proximity
sensors and you'll notice that uh two of
them are being blocked by its hand it's
actually seeing its own hand everybody
see that at the same time that this
robot is seeing its own hand it is also
seeing a single object that's falling
from above and the dashed Arrow here is
telling us that this object can fall at
different angles towards the bottom of
the screen
it can fall at different
velocities from the robot's point of
view all it knows is that its second
third and seventh proximity sensor are
chirping and the other four proximity
sensors are at
zero how does the robot know which of
these is
self and which of these is
nonself seems easy right the one the
object that's really far away that
that's probably nonself and the thing
that's really close is probably
self easy now but as this object
continues to fall and touches this
imaginary Arc here now it's seeing self
and it's seeing nonself which is equally
close to it how does it know which is
which not so not so easy yeah okay how
did the investigators evolve
self non-self discrimination they're
going to rerun the experiment they just
did before they made a few changes to
the robot and a little bit to its task
environment the underlying evolutionary
algorithm stays exactly the same they're
going to evolve populations of CNS but
they're also going to change the fitness
function the fitness function is still
going to compute P for each CNN in the
population its average ability over a
bunch of object drops for each for the
eyth object drop they're going to
compute the performance of the c n
during that ith object drop and they're
going to compute it using this equation
again there's a typo in the paper where
it says Max it should be Min you'll see
that on the right hand side of this
equal sign there is only one variable
Theta subi and Theta subi is the angular
error error at the end of the ith trial
the end the trial ends when this object
touches this imaginary
Arc and at that point they look at the
angle of the object relative to the
robot so if this black sphere hits here
this would be an angle of whatever that
is minus pi over 8
radians and the angle of the arm in this
case it looks like it's minus pi over 16
radians more or less L Theta is going to
take the air between those two
angles what is this Fitness term doing
what is it trying to evolve CER and NS
to
do catch the ball right Theta you can if
you ignore all the other Machinery in
this term Theta is on the right hand
side of the minus sign so they're trying
to uh they're trying to Min if this
thing if this error is a positive always
a positive value which it is because
it's inside absolute
bars they're trying to make this error
minimal which is the robot should catch
the object its little hand should be
exactly where the object is when the
object hits this imaginary
Arc so far so good okay all right evolve
evolve evolve evolve and at the end of
evolution they pluck out the CN that has
the highest P value the most fit CNN and
then they drop that CNN back into this
little robot over and over and over
again under a whole bunch of different
conditions let's look at these
conditions on the horizontal axis here
they're reporting final object error so
this is the angle at which the object
hits this imaginary Arc minus values uh
left uh the left hand part of this pan
panel represents objects that hit above
and to the left of the robot and the
right hand side of this panel
corresponds to objects that fall and hit
the right hand side of the
robot the vertical axis represents the
angle of the arm when those situations
occur tell me about the behavior of this
robot when it's armed with this
ctrnn how does it do
Rob okay so when the object falls and
hits right above the robot the air bars
are a little bit taller here
representing there's a little bit more
variation in its Behavior sometimes when
that object hits directly ahead
sometimes the arm is a little bit to the
left
and sometimes when that object hits
directly overhead the arm is a little
bit to the right so it's a little unsure
but generally speaking how does the
robot
do it's good right it's not optimal
again what would optimal Behavior here
look like no error no error you see this
dashed Gray Line underneath that's what
it should be doing right the angle of
its arm should always be exactly the
angle at which the object hits the
imaginary Arc
good not
perfect okay here we go this is arguably
the most difficult panel to parse so
deep breath uh we'll take it a little
bit at a time same thing we're looking
at the behavior produced by one CN when
we drop that one CNN sequentially into
the
robot some cases uh uh the let's see
let's start with um let's start with the
colors here so
dark uh dark trajectories here
correspond to cases in which let me make
sure I get this
right oh yeah yeah okay trajectories are
shaded according to the initial angular
position of the object so black
trajectories over here which you can't
see because they're underneath this
light trajectory dark trajectories over
here correspond to the object being
dropped
above and to the
left lightly colored trajectories
correspond to objects being dropped
above and to the right of the
robot the uh the actual position of the
trajectory corresponds to the angle of
the robot's arm so all of the
trajectories that start up here to the
left this is the investigators taking
the robot arm and cranking it to the
left just before the simulation begins
and then when the simulation begins they
let the ctrnn control the arm all the
trajectories that start bunched up here
in the upper right those are cases in
which the investigators cranked the
robot's arm to plus pi over8 radians and
then when the simulation starts they let
the robot the CNN control the
arm light gray trajectories that start
to the left to the left meaning the
robot's arm was cranked to the left but
light trajectories mean the robot's arm
is to the left and the object drops from
upper
right get
it black trajectories to the left here
the trajectories to the left object is
cranked to the left the trajectories are
black the object starts falling from
upper
left
can you parse the rest of this figure
what's
happening the
horizontal uh the horizontal position of
the trajectory at any point in time
represents the angle of the arm during
the
simulation what's
happening sweeping absolutely whatever
else is going on in every case Cas it's
doing a lot of this what else can you
tell me about what this robot does under
these
conditions what does it do at the end
when the object gets to the robot what's
happening there's four different initial
conditions arm crank to the left drop
the object from left upper left up or
upper right crank the arm to the right
drop the object from upper left or upper
right four different initial conditions
what happens in all these
cases absolutely at the end down
here all of these
trajectories are at an angle of zero the
object the robot is holding its hand
directly overhead we know that this
particular evolve ctrnn more or less
does the right thing under most
conditions so where do you think the
object is hitting regardless of whether
it's dropped from upper left or upper
right middle of the AR the middle of the
Ark right it's catching in every case
the ctrnn is enabling the robot to catch
the object more or less there's a little
bit of uncertainty here but it's mostly
doing the right
thing how how is it catching the
object it's like
tracking it as it's coming down and
sweeping across it and then as it comes
down it looks
likees absolutely yeah you can see like
when it's on the other side it goes all
the way over and then it tracks it down
and you're talking about these
trajectories they start over here
exactly so let's let's follow one up
here to the right meaning the object was
dropped upper right and the arm goes
like this and then if we follow this
trajectory over over here the object the
arm is going all the way over to the
left and we're following a dark
trajectory sorry I misspoke I misspoke
sorry if we follow a dark trajectory
from upper right uh if it's a dark
trajectory that means the object was
dropped from upper left but the arm was
cranked all the way to the right the
object starts to fall the arm over
overshoots and then as this object is
falling from upper left the robot is
showing off right it's sweeping its arm
back and forth it's basically pointing
to where it's going to capture the
object it's pulling a Babe Ruth here
right saying I know over
here it's like it seems like it figures
out pretty quickly where the other thing
is you can see that it sweeps over to
the under the it seems to know pretty
quickly where the object is sense it's
a
it knows like okay at this point yeah
kind of know where my arm is like good
point does it know that does it know
that its hand is smaller than the
falling object we know it because we're
looking at this
jpeg it only gets seven numbers at any
instant in time it's only ever got one
number does it know
is it easy for this robot because it
knows its hand is small and the falling
object is
Big learned that maybe maybe it's
learned that remember the Gantry robot
which was able to distinguish between
triangles and rectangles it learned to
or it evolved the ability to distinguish
between those two shapes through
movement probably the same thing is
going on here it looks like this is a
relatively easy task for the robot to to
solve so far so good
okay okay let's keep going we've got 5
minutes left so we should be able to
tackle the third of the fourth
competencies this one is short-term
memory if you an organism or a machine
cannot remember anything from your past
there's only so many things you can do
you're you're pretty fragile right
definitely an important building block
of intelligence is memory so how do we
evolve a robot to remember stuff we've
already seen some robots like the Gantry
robot that does evolve the ability to
remember stuff let's have look at
another example okay we're back to our
Space Invaders robot now it's got two
rocket thrusters underneath it's moving
back and forth along the bottom of the
screen it's got seven proximity sensors
like before but now they're being drawn
with dashed lines which is a visual
representation of an additional detail
they built into this experiment which is
that the robot is able to see but the
moment that the robot starts
moving the proximity all seven proximity
sensors turn off it goes blind so this
robot cannot move and sense at the same
time it's being forced to sense and then
to quote unquote choose to act and the
moment it chooses to act no more sensory
information they're going to drop uh
single objects from the top of the
screen and those single objects are
going to fall at different angles
towards the bottom of the screen and
they might fall at faster uh or slower
velocities you can probably guess what
the robot is supposed to do in these
cases what's the robot supposed to do in
this particular
event get hit by the ball go catch the
ball catch the ball yeah so you're the
robot you're standing motionless you're
watching stuff the object fall from
above you make a decision you go blind
and you start moving to make sure you're
there when you catch it this is a very
simple Fitness function we've got du
subi on the right hand side of the minus
sign which is telling us
what are they reward is evolution
rewarding for d or penalizing for
DUI peniz penalizing we want to min
minimize DUI DUI is the horizontal
distance between the robot and the
object when it hits the bottom of the
screen pretty simple right minimize that
distance catch the
object okay here we go evolve evolve
evolve evolve at the end of The
evolutionary algorithm pluck out of the
population of evolved cnns the one that
has highest Fitness and drop that c trnn
repeatedly back into the robot under a
whole bunch of different conditions what
are those different conditions they're
going to drop the object so that it hits
the ground at different horizontal
positions in these cases over here the
object uh is going to hit bottom left
part of the screen over here the object
is going to hit the bottom right side of
the screen and for all of those cases
the vertical axis is telling us where
the robot was when that happened the
robot was either at the left part of the
screen at the bottom center of the
screen or at the uh lower right part of
the screen how does the robot
do well but not perfect again right and
for some reason it seems to be having a
particularly hard time with objects that
are hitting uh the midpoint of the
bottom of the screen why who knows
okay I think we'll end with this plot
today same evolve ctrnn we're going to
put it back in the robot a whole bunch
of
times we're going to start dropping uh
we're going to start dropping the
objects and again the horizontal axis
here uh the horizontal axis here is now
going to represent where was the robot
when the object hit the ground bottom
center bottom left or bottom right
the vertical a sorry I misspoke
horizontal axis is representing the
difference between the robot and the
object's position when the object hits
the ground minus 40 means the object hit
40 units to the left of the robot plus
40 means the object hit 40 units to the
right of the robot in most of the cases
here you can see the robot did more or
less the right thing it was directly
under underneath the object when the
object hit the
ground vertical axis here represents the
height of the
robot and the horizontal difference
between the the robot's position and the
object's position you'll notice that for
a while all almost all of these
trajectories are perfectly vertical what
is that mean what does that tell us
about the robot's Behavior Ming the
robot is not moving the object the
object is placed 20 above placed 20
units to the left of the robot at the
top of the screen that object starts
falling and that horizontal difference
doesn't change then it does start
changing when the trajectory deviates
from vertical what what's
happening it's like acting upon its
prediction of where the their object is
eventually going to fall it's acting on
its prediction right it starts moving
which means it's blind at that point how
does it
move continu continuously there's no
shaking left and right anymore it's
constant movement at a constant velocity
until catches the object
why because
it because
is like it's not trying to change for
like what the what like the later
positions of the other like object is so
the robot just decides like it's going
to go to this place and it starts
heading there and there's no there's no
other information to make it like swing
back and forth and scan the air it
doesn't need to sweep back and forth
because it's it's blind it can't see
anything right it's cat whis wh scers
have been cut which suggests that in
these other experiments it was actually
probably useful to be doing this
right so if it's moving a con blind the
whole
timeing it's blind the whole time it's
moving all of these times in which these
trajectories are non-vertical the robot
is moving and it's
blind it has short-term memory it has
short-term memory it knows the moment it
starts moving it moves starts moving at
a constant velocity and it knows that it
that velocity is going to get it right
to the object right when the object gets
there so does that mean that like one of
it neurons or some of them evolve to
have like those
longer like we were looking at how those
researchers had some neurons that have
like longer oh longer term Behavior
versus like shorter Behavior the the
time constant con maybe maybe the CER
has tuned the speed of response of some
of the neurons to produce this slow
stroll at a constant rate to get there
maybe
maybe there's a couple of other details
uh in this plot about the behavior of
this robot we'll save that for next time
you have a quiz due tonight grads you're
working you're starting work on D1
undergrads you're working on A6 see you
all on
Thursday